Welcome back.
I'm Lynn Neary, sitting in for Diane Rehm.
My guest this hour is Nicholas Bazbanes.
He's the author of Patience and Fortitude, a roving chronicle of book people, book places, and book culture.
I wanted to ask you to react to a quote that was in the book from Robert Taylor of Hampshire College, who was prescient, I guess you would say, about the effect that technology would have on libraries.
He wrote this in 1967.
And he said the word library carries too many connotations, which may not let the library get to tomorrow.
The term exaggerates the difference between print and other media.
It emphasizes the warehouse rather than the dynamic process.
And he is somebody who at that time argued against having too many books in the library.
Uh-huh.
I'm sorry, I thank you so much for bringing up that particular episode.
That is really one of the little lone episodes in the development of college and university libraries that I came across and that I write about in Patience and Fortitude.
And Taylor did make that statement in print in 1967, and it was right when Hampshire College, which is a little liberal arts college in western Massachusetts, was being established.
Hampshire is a very fascinating little example.
Hampshire College was founded by the faculties, by the faculties and administrators of Mount Holyoke College, Smith College, Amherst College, and University of Massachusetts, all of which are within 10 or 15 miles of each other.
And they wanted to do an experimental institution, do the kinds of things that they weren't really doing on their own campuses.
And they also then wanted to develop a new kind of a library.
Now, of course, this is the 60s.
There were computers.
But we're not talking about the Internet at that point.
We're talking about all kinds of electronic things.
And Taylor felt that the printed book was about to enter the margins of society.
I interviewed Taylor to make this brief 30 years later.
Hampshire is now building a larger library.
And what made this work, by the way, was the five college consortium that they had out there.
Hampshire would build a library that would contain perhaps 100,000 books, but they could borrow freely from Amherst, Smith, Mount Holyoke, and UMass.
And what they found out is that thousands more books come into Hampshire than go out.
The students do require their books.
They want their books.
They're now building a much larger library.
a library at Hampshire College.
They've established out there a center for the book.
They are now some pro-printed book.
It's amazing.
And Taylor, I asked him, I said, I read that quote to him, and I quote him in the book here.
He said, well, I guess I was pretty silly.
I forget the exact quote, but he's embarrassed by having, today, looking back 30 years for having predicted the end of the library as we know it.
I guess he admits that he was wrong.
Okay, great story.
Jim in St.
Louis, Missouri, hello.
Hi, thank you for taking my call.
A quick comment and a quick question.
I recently, by a series of flukes, got on the internet and made my first internet purchase, something I've been avoiding.
I have a great affection for an old 1940 film with Robert Montgomery, the Earl of Chicago.
And I actually found an ex-virory book, a 1937 novel of that title by a movie director.
So I would have
never found that if I hadn't gone on the internet.
So I suspect that many people selling things over the internet may be unwittingly or wittingly preserving books that otherwise might go by the wayside.
The question I'd like to ask is, in your researches, Mr. Besmein, have you come across any information about the great Buddhist monastery and library at the University of Nalanda in Bihar, which was destroyed later by
during the Muslim invasion?
No, I haven't, and I'm writing it down briefly here.
Perhaps you could... Could you give me a little more information?
I would love to read.
This is precisely the kind of thing that I'm looking for for this next book.
It was supposedly constructed around 5th century A.D., which is a period in the history of Buddhism before Buddhism became more nationalistic, so to speak.
And...
Later, I think it was responsible for the dissemination of Buddhist teachings and Buddhist activity all over Asia.
And once again, where was it?
It's in Bihar and N-A-L-A-N-D-A, Nalanda.
It was a great monastery, and it contained the library resources that drew people from as far away as China and
You can be sure I will be... It was destroyed later during the invasion.
But it seems to me to be often overlooked by us here in the West.
But it was, by all accounts, an extraordinary center.
Thank you for the tip.
Thanks very much, Jim.
You're very welcome.
It's always nice to hear an author getting a tip right there on the air.
I have my notebook with me at all times.
George in Plantation, Florida.
Hello.
I wonder if the gentleman can tell us something about the wonderful library building that's still standing at Ephesus.
I know St.
Peter lived nearby and presumably studied there, and the greatest story I know, I've seen it several times, is that the city officials used to gather there, and they had an underground passage to the brothel across the street, and so the library was very important to them.
So I wonder if you know anything about that.
I actually traveled to Ephesus with this new book, pardon me, and I have a photograph that I shot of this library.
It was not, by ancient standards, a great library.
It was a Roman library.
I think it had about 15,000 volumes.
And the Austrians have rebuilt it, so not the entire library, of course, but the facade.
And it is quite striking.
The great library in that region that I write about, which I went to visit, is Pergamum in Turkey, not far from Ephesus.
And right after I write about Alexandria in the new book, I go to Pergamum, because this was the great rival library to Alexandria.
Mm-hmm.
established about the same time.
And it is the only library from Hellenistic times that survives in any fashion.
You can actually go and walk in the old reading rooms and not get goose pimples just thinking about it.
And so I do write about that library, which existed for 150 years.
And the books, we know what happened to them.
When Antony was courting Cleopatra, he took the 200,000 books and gave them to her as a gift.
And that similarly ended what was then a great library, a great center of research.
But the library at Ephesus was a private library.
It was about 15,000 volumes.
It came somewhat later than Pergamum.
I don't write about it at any great length in the new book, but I do have a lovely photograph of it.
Okay.
Thanks so much for your call, George.
And Libby in Tucson, Arizona.
Hello.
Hi.
My 9-year-old daughter is named Hypatia.
Oh, I love that.
Actually, she's named Patia, shortened.
after Hypatia, the woman, the scholar and mathematician who was the head of the Library of Alexandria and who was murdered by a Christian mob.
And I wonder if your book discusses her story at all?
I don't discuss her story.
I do name her, but her story is one of the great stories in the tradition of Alexandria.
And again, it points out how important women were in the ancient world, certainly at the Greek libraries and the Greek centers of scholarship.
But she was a very notable name, and that's a wonderful name for her child, by the way.
Are you a librarian, Libby?
No, I'm not, but my husband's an astronomer, so that's how he became aware of her story.
That's a wonderful name.
I think it is an apocryphal story for today, given the religious velatry that we're experiencing.
I think it teaches a moral lesson for tolerance and acceptance of people of other beliefs.
Ironically, Bishop Cyril was canonized because of his role in inciting her murder.
But she's not an apocryphal figure, I think we should point out.
I mean, she's an actual figure, I do believe.
Correct, correct.
I think it's a lesson to all of us.
Thanks so much for your call, Libby.
I'm learning a lot here today.
Let's go to Alice in Miami, Florida.
Hello, Alice.
Hi.
What a wonderful program.
One of the things I hope that men will ask women to marry them and give them victory
You know, large amounts of books.
I've heard that before.
What a great gift.
A gift of 200,000 exquisite books.
You know, my question is that, you know, I know that there were a lot of African-American authors during the 60s and 70s.
However, when I go to second-hand bookstores or, you know, the other agencies,
that had books like Salvation Army and stuff.
I don't find those books, and I was wondering if they have been thrown away.
I'm trying to encourage people not to do so.
And then also, what do you think happened to them?
I know there were lots of those authors, and yet those books are not available.
Well, I write about the person I regard as the greatest living African-American collector in Gentle Madness,
a gentleman by the name of Charles Bloxham, briefly who was told when he was a youngster growing up in Pennsylvania, he asked a teacher why it is that when he reads in the history books, he never sees any mention of black people, or to use the word that was operative about Negroes.
And he was told by a teacher that that is because, Charles, black people have no history.
And he said, if that's the case, then how do you explain all these extraordinary stories my grandfather and my great-grandfather told me about the Underground Railroad and these marvelous stories of survival, these marvelous folktales that came over from Africa?
He determined at that point that he would go out and document his heritage.
The short of this story is that Blockson went to Pennsylvania State University.
He was a teammate of Lenny Moore.
They were roommates, Roosevelt Greer.
Charles was offered a no-cut contract from the New York Giants, and after a week in the field, he walked away.
Lenny Moore, I later interviewed, said we thought Charles was nuts, but then I looked back, he knew what he was doing better than anyone else.
And Charles said, what I wanted to be was a black bibliophile.
And the short of this story is that 80,000 or so books that Charles collected are now at Temple University.
In Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, it is one of the great, great collections of African-American literature and history.
Here in Washington, Howard University has a marvelous collection of African-American material.
Harvard University has a great collection.
And, of course, the greatest of them all is the Schomburg Center in New York City, which is fabulous.
Charles walked in there once.
He was a great track star, and he was in New York for an event.
And he said, I took the A train to Harlem.
And he did the old Ellington tune.
And he went up there and got off at Lenox on 125th.
And that's when he walked into the Schaumburg Center.
And he said, I knew I wasn't alone.
I knew I had a purpose in life.
And he is now considered the living Schaumburg.
My teacher, she told me when I was in seventh grade, my English teacher, she said, listen, don't bother putting your energy into all of this writing.
because your people do not have many authors or writers.
I'm saddened to hear that, Alice, because you know and I know and we all know that that's not true.
And all you have to do is to go to any of these libraries that I've just mentioned, and you will have tears in your eyes when you walk in.
That was a long time ago.
Thanks so much for your call, Alice.
Thank you.
Nicholas Basbanes is the author of Patience and Fortitude, a roving chronicle of book people, book places, and book culture.
I'm Lynn Neary, and you are listening to The Diane Rehm Show.
I'm going to try and get one more call in here now.
Richard in Phoenix, Arizona, hello.
Hello.
Yes, I happen to be one of those antiquarian scholar booksellers, and what amazes me is the great university special collections librarians that understand the significance of a collection that's perhaps unique and never been put forward, and almost instantly they have the imagination to see it in context.
I like your comments.
I refer you to the chapter in my new book called Hunters and Gatherers.
And what I try to demonstrate, there is precisely what you're suggesting right now.
These great collections that are really...
evolved from the perception of a bookseller, somebody who really sees the connections.
A theme I also write about, which I haven't mentioned, are the Jewish emigre booksellers who escaped from Germany during the 1930s and who found refuge in North America, and who in turn knew where the books were in Europe after the war, knew where to go...
to go and get them and knew which institutions in the United States would benefit greatly from them.
The result is that we have materials here that are superior to the regions that they document in Europe.
And I write about this in that book.
I don't know if that's precisely the question that you asked, but it is the perception of antiquarian people, booksellers, who have to make a case to a curator, a librarian at an academic institution, of why this material is important and why it has to be preserved.
And just finally, what's ahead for books and for libraries?
So far they've survived.
Are they going to survive into the third millennium?
I quote the subtitle of my next book, The Permanence of Books in an Impermanent World, and I believe yes.
You have great faith in that.
I have abiding great faith.
And how will it change?
Will it change?
You know, books have changed through thousands of years.
I mean, they always haven't been on paper.
Books have been carved on stone.
They've been on clay tablets.
They've been on papyrus.
They've been on parchment.
And now we'll find them in a different form.
But the book itself survives.
That's the greatest tool that's ever been devised by humans.
Well, thanks so much for joining me today.
I've really enjoyed this.
It's been fun.
Nicholas Basbanes is the author of Patience and Fortitude, a roving chronicle of book people, book places, and book culture.
The Diane Rehm Show is produced by Sandra Pinkert, Elizabeth Terry, and Adams.